today being teacher's day
let us pay a small tribute to mr vr
venkateshan who was undoubtedly one of
the best teachers for marine engineers
he was considered a guru of control
engineering amongst marine engineers
it may be impossible for most of us to
understand this topic the way he had
understood
i might i never ever died to make a
video on this topic
but
as an afterthought i felt the best
tribute i can play to brb is to make a
small video on a topic he had really
loved and mastered
i had always found this topic very
challenging and still have lots of gaps
in my understanding
the clarity of thought vr we had will
always be elusive to most of us
i strongly hope that i will be able to
do some justice to this topic and
generate enough interest
to direct you to his elaborate video on
this topic in hmt youtube channel the
link for his full-length video will be
available in the description
with a small request to the departed
soul to guide us further on the pursuit
to understand marine engineering let's
move on to the video in this video we
will try and understand the basics of
three types of control action
proportional integral and derivative
most of the materials available
in the internet or in the books
look at it in a very mathematical way
like this
this is proportional to kpe in some
bracket some tea
which is terrifying to most of us marine
engineers except for a gifted few
if somebody wants elaboration on
mathematics please do request in comment
section we can handle it separately but
let us now try to understand it in a
very rudimentary way
without any mathematics by taking the
example of maintaining the level of
water in the tank
we want the water level to be maintained
here we call this at the set point
presently it is in a steady state
balanced
with water flowing in supply of water
flowing in
at 200 liters per minute and water being
consumed from the tank at 200 liters per
minute
i have a supply valve here which is
presently fifty percent open i can keep
it hundred percent open or hundred
percent shut
and this wall can be controlled
incrementally
or say proportionately between this uh
full open and full set position now the
water
level in the tank is supposed to
maintain here and if by chance the water
level falls here
what i have is a error
we call it as a deviation or offset or
error
we also sometimes use the
jargon's desired value
of the control variable so these are all
just jargons but let us keep it simple
we want the water level to be here now
as i already told you
200 liters of water per minute is
consumed from the tank
and same 200 liters
per minute of water is
filling the tank so the level obviously
is going to maintain here now suddenly
the consumer is now
started consuming more
so he starts consuming 300 liters of
water from the tank per minute
so it is obvious that the level of water
in the tank will reduce
now it is obvious that
if i want the level of water to be here
i need to open this wall
now the question we are going to
ask here is how much will this wall open
supply wall
now suppose i make a relationship
between this
error or the deviation
and the opening of the wall
in such a way
that i establish a proportional
relationship between the error and
opening of the wall
i call this as proportional action
the opening of the wall depends on how
much is the error
that is the proportionality i am talking
about
this opening of the wall i call it as
corrective action
now when i have a proportionality
established
you can observe that it will happen only
after the error has happened that means
this valve will commence opening or
commence correcting only after the error
has happened the supply valve opens more
and more
as the deviation becomes more as the
supply wall opens more and more
there will come a point
where the supply is equal to
300 liters per minute the same as the
consumption now since the supply is
equal to consumption we call this at the
steady state condition
now the level will
remain steadier
and it will not go down any further
but what we have here left is the
error or offset or deviation
now suppose i had linked the
proportional
action in such a way that
when the error is so much
the wall will be full open
and when the
level is very high here the wall will be
full shut
we know that
the
water level has to be between these two
points it is not possible for the water
level to cross
these two limiting points it has to be
somewhere in between these two points
now we can see that this is
quite a change in level possibility if i
don't want the water level to fluctuate
so much between these two points and it
should be fluctuating only between these
two points
what i what do i need to do
i need to ensure that
when the level is here
my wall is full open
and when the level is here the ball is
full shut
so what have i done here
i have ensured that for a small change
in the
deviation
i am creating a bigger change in the
opening of the wall or shutting of the
wall
so this adjustment is in simple terms
called the proportional band the narrow
the proportional band
i can reduce the maximum deviation
now this is what people roughly refer to
as proportional band
it is in fact it in fact uh tells you
about the sensitivity of
the corrective action
with respect to the error
this proportional band is also sometimes
mathematically they define it as it is
the opposite of gain
but uh
we will not speak about it honestly here
to keep things simple
so going back to the level of water in
the tank
so we know that
the wall was opening faster
when the error happened and the error
got stabilized here now if i don't want
the error to be there at all
we have another trick in our cupboard
and that is called the integral action
now what is integral action
it may be a little bit jargonist but we
say that
rate of corrective action is
proportional to the deviation in other
terms what does it mean
if i have integral action
the integral action see here the let us
take it step by step because of our
proportional action
the wall started opening and here i got
a steady state but i got a error
offset now i want to eliminate the
offset how can i eliminate the offset
by making sure that the val is opening
more so this is exactly what the
integral action is going to do now we
have defined it mathematically as
rate of corrective action is
proportional to the deviation now when
we say rate obviously it means that the
wall is opening
if the wall is not moving then obviously
there is no rate of opening
okay that we can also say that the wall
will stop opening more
when the deviation is not there so
what do we conclude we conclude that the
integral action actually removes the
deviation so val will continue to open
because the error is there and if the
wall continues to open more than what
was required that 300 liters per minute
the level will start rising up and it
will remove the deviation you see this
is the job of the
integral action let us now look at the
third option which is called the
derivative action
now let us see how does it define
mathematically it says that's correct to
action is proportional to the rate of
deviation
here it means that the wall opening
is going to see how fast the deviation
is happening see rate of deviation that
means how fast
the deviation is happening so it is
predictive in nature
on the basis of this prediction
this wall will continue to open more
than what the p action would have done
it is anticipating a big drop in level
the outcome of this derivative action
is that
the stability point
with or without offset is achieved
quickly
so we can also
think it like this you see here let us
go back to
this particular example
now i have i'm go back going back to 200
liters
and somebody has
opened 300 liters the control system is
seeing that oh
the level has started falling is the
control system measuring that is looking
the rate of fall of the
level
and it is now going to predict oh at
this rate the level is falling so fast
that means i need to open much more
so the deviation is actually triggering
the proportional action and already
opening the wall
and the differential action is
predicting that at how fast the level is
falling so i'll open that much more
so what will happen the stability will
be arrived much earlier here the level
will settle here rather than here if the
derivative action was not there
right
the level will settle here because it
was predictive in nature and the
integral action will put it back to the
set point because it will remove the
offset let us summarize the whole thing
depending on the error and the
relationship between the error
and this opening of this wall
there are three types of action one is
the one which is proportional action so
the value is going to be operated by the
p
proportional action which is going to
depend on the
error then to remove the offset i have
the integral action
the whole idea of this integral action
is to remove the offset
and to make sure that the stability
point is reached earlier the level
doesn't fluctuate too much
i have the derivative action also so
then when i have a pid controller
this wall is
opening of the value the resultant of
all these three actions
put together
so that is how
the controls are happening in the pid
controller
the processing of these controls can be
pneumatic electronic digital
and generally they can be used for
anything like controlling the level
controlling the pressure
controlling the temperature controlling
the speed
so the topic is much more than what we
are described here i recommend you to
please go to the link provided in the
description section to see
our idea we are regulations full video
on this topic which will be very
elaborate with great examples
i also request you to please see his
beautiful videos on governor group
reverse power and other complicated
conceptual topics
they're all available on hmt youtube
site
which avengers is not there with with us
his knowledge and dedication had in fact
inspired me
i'm sure his fantastic videos will
continue to guide generations of marine
engineers in future also
may soul rest in peace
om shanti